Hi, Caleb!
What is that?
Woman:
If you were able to imagine
a huge fourth
of July going off,
that is what's happening
in the brain of an infant.
He's noticing everything...
Langley:
Eventually in time,
he's going to be able
to sit up on his own,
crawl a little bit more.
All of those pieces
are critical development
with our infants.
Narrator:
Years of data demonstrate
that infants who receive
high quality care
do better in school and in life.
Forty years ago, our nation
came tantalizingly close
to making high quality
care like this
available to every family
who wanted it.
But we didn't...
There are so many families
in general
who are stuck
in the situation of leaving
their children in care
that they don't feel
comfortable with
or that they don't feel is safe,
or that they don't feel
is helping their child
develop to the fullest
because that's simply the only
option they can afford.
Narrator:
Unlike these children,
too many American kids
experience childcare
that is unregulated,
mediocre at best,
and hugely expensive-
despite the fact
that parents work
and depend on care
more than ever.
How are you?
Clare Sanford works
with parents
determined to find
the high quality care
all children need to thrive.
She's also a mother of two.
Should we take these
home to show dad?
Sanford:
We both work full time,
and our kids are actually
in care, quite a bit,
50+ hours a week.
Man:
When tweedle beetles fight...
Sanford:
Our childcare expenses,
now that we have a second
child in full-time care,
I think it runs to 18% or 19%
of our gross income...
which seems like a lot!
It's way more than we spend
on our mortgage.
Narrator:
And it's not just the cost.
In some places,
dog kennels are inspected more
often than childcare facilities.
Most childcare workers
are paid less
than parking-lot attendants.
And with few exceptions,
parents are pretty much
on their own.
Sanford:
We want to believe
that every individual is able
to pull themselves up
with their own boot straps
and there's a sense
that providing for
children and families
in some ways is a form
of government interference
instead of a support for
families and children.
Narrator:
But it wasn't always this way.
Do we know the full story?
How did a country
that says it cares
about its youngest children
end up with a system
that neglects the needs
of so many of them?
World War II drastically,
and suddenly,
propelled American women
into the workforce.
Dubbed "Rosie the Riveters,"
they relocated to other
parts of the country
to work in shipyards
and armament factories...
many with young children
in tow.
Woman:
They were away
from their family,
they were away from
the structures and networks
that they could've depended
on for childcare,
and they needed somebody
to watch their children.
When they didn't have any,
they did what they could do.
They left children alone,
they left children in charge
of other children,
they left children
in often, trailers.
Narrator:
The government responded,
and approved funding
for a national network
of child development centers
under legislation
known as The Lanham Act.
When married women
with smatt children
have to take jobs,
everything possible
will be done
to provide day care
for the children.
Narrator:
Lanham Act programs
provided care for 600,000 kids
at 3,000 centers
across the country.
Lovett:
It focused not only
on children's development,
it focused on their health,
on their education,
on their welfare,
on nutrition.
It really envisioned
an investment
in the children
of these workers
as something that would
benefit the country
in the long run.
Narrator:
When the war ended,
the nation celebrated.
But the Lanham Act
was terminated-
and most of the childcare
centers were shut down.
Policymakers expected
and childcare,
to return to the home...
But the number
of working mothers
would continue to grow.
After the war,
Americans entered
a period of hope,
but great uncertainty.
But again, government
eased American families
through this huge
social change
with low-cost mortgages...
farm and small business loans...
college tuition...
job training...
and tax deductions
for dependent children.
The result?
An increase in
well-paid jobs, marriages,
and affordable housing.
Lovett:
Federal subsidies
really facilitated a move
on a grand scale
into what we would think of
as middle class.
Narrator:
post-war prosperity
was by and large limited
to white families.
The Civil Rights movement
was growing.
African Americans demanded
the same rights
and opportunities
granted to white families
in the booming
post-war economy.
Woman:
In many ways,
the Civil Rights Movement
really was about children.
Having parents who went
and sacrificed everything
in order to get their children
a better life.
And a fair chance to realize
their individual potential.
Man:
It's hard to overestimate
the importance of
the Civil Rights Movement
in establishing equality
as a core value
of '60s political movements.
It shapes all of the subsequent
movements into the 1960s.
Narrator:
And it forced political leaders
to confront
America's inequalities.
This Administration today,
here and now,
declares unconditional war
on poverty in America.
(applause)
Narrator:
In 1964,
President Lyndon Johnson
introduced
the nation's
Great Society legislation:
programs like Medicare
and Medicaid,
job training,
and Civil Rights laws
would enable more
Americans to share
in the nation's
growing prosperity.
Self:
In the '60s,
political movements
are pushing
a little bit closer
toward a notion
of a collective responsibility
for the health and well-being
of all families.
The Great Society is
an extension of that idea.
Lovett:
It's hard for us
to imagine it now,
but I think the vision
of the future
in the 1960s and the 1970s
was one that was shared.
We had shared visions
of what was possible.
There was an optimism
about what you could do
in the future,
and children were
a central part of that.
Narrator:
At the same time,
the lives of mothers
were changing.
Self:
There's a real dramatic increase
in the number of women
in the paid workforce
between the World War II era
and the 1970s.
And that's women with younger
children now for the first time
coming into the paid workforce
in large, large numbers.
Man:
We were looking at projections,
and there were clearly going
to be more women working
because most of them
required it,
men's supervisory wages
were stuck,
and suddenly women who may
still want to stay home
were required to work.
Lovett:
You have an economic situation
which will really necessitate
a return to work.
Something like 50% of women,
and especially working mothers,
returned to the workforce.
And so you have to
accommodate that!
A quality comprehensive
child development program
in this country, I think,
would be cost-effective.
I know it would be.
It would be one of the best
dollar investments
we ever made, just in
sheer economic terms.
Narrator:
In 1971, Minnesota Senator
and future Vice President
Walter Mondale
championed an ambitious
new policy,
to meet the changing needs
of children
and working families:
comprehensive childcare
for all American families.
Sid Johnson,
a young government aide,
ran Mondale's subcommittee.
Johnson:
He told me
that in the Washington Post
there'd been an article
about a young African-American
in the second or third grade
who went to school within view
of his Senate office building...
His mother couldn't afford
day care.
Single parent.
The younger brother
at home-no lunch.
And Freddie would go
to school,
take half of his school lunch
and run home
and share it with
his younger brother.
On this day,
he was running fast
and he was killed by a truck
that ran over him.
I'll never get over that.
Right in the nation's capital,
right under the capital dome,
good people trying under the
toughest of circumstances.
And Senator Mondale thought,
"How could this happen
in our country-
the richest country
in the world?"
Nixon:
I see the face of a child.
What his color is,
what his ancestry is,
doesn't matter.
What does matter is
he is an American child.
That child is more important
than any
politician's promise...
Narrator:
Senator Mondale
had every reason to believe
that the richest country
in the world
would make life better for
its most vulnerable citizens.
Nixon:
I ask you to help me make
the American dream come true,
for those to whom it seems
an impossible dream today.
Narrator:
When Richard Nixon took office,
he promised support for
children from birth to five.
What happens to the child
from a nutritional standpoint,
from an educational standpoint,
from an environmental
standpoint,
in the years between 1 and 5
may affect that child
for the balance of his life
regardless of what may
happen after that time.
Man:
We used to have
a wonderful tradition.
Every ten years
there would be a White House
Conference on Children.
In 1970,
Nixon gave a presentation.
I helped write his speech,
and the absolute
number one priority
that they wanted action on
was good quality,
affordable childcare.
The big debate within
the Nixon Administration
was what was the quality of
that childcare going to be?
A lot of the conservatives
in the Nixon Administration,
they wanted what we would
call custodial care -
just keep 'em dry
and safe and that's it.
Mondale:
We had a big fight over that.
We wanted quality care.
And I think all the evidence
shows that's what works.
As a matter of fact,
just custodial care -
a child stacked with other
children with no help-
could be harmful.
Narrator:
Indiana Congressman
John Brademas
co-sponsored the bill,
which would be called
the Comprehensive Child
Development Act.
The legislation aimed to make
high quality childcare
and early education available
to all American families.
It would be modeled
after Head Start,
an early childhood program
that was part of
the Great Society vision.
Like other Great Society
programs,
Head Start sought
to promote social equality
and national prosperity.
Teacher:
I want everybody to write, ABC.
Everybody!
Narrator:
Marian Wright Edelman,
a young lawyer just out
of Yale Law School,
worked with Head Start
in rural Mississippi
during the summer of 1965
when it first began.
Edelman:
That was the largest
Head Start program
in the nation.
13,000 children, it created
3,000 new jobs.
It was real
parent participation,
it was hope,
it was healthcare.
And Head Start
was comprehensive
so that you got to deal with
all the needs of the child.
And it was a beacon of what
should be for every child.
Narrator:
But funding for Head Start
was limited, and only available
to a fraction of children.
Edelman saw the child
development act
as a way to provide
the Head Start
experience to all children,
and organized a coalition
to help draft
and push through
the legislation.
Edelman:
The unions were
the first place I went.
I went to the teachers.
Feminism was robust then,
and they became
apart of the coalition.
It was pretty clear
to me early on
that you had to build
self-interest
into doing good for children
as a way of moving forward.
Lovett:
Groups like
the National Organization
of Women,
or the Women's Action Alliance
really understood that,
in fact, if you wanted to
make a difference,
a tangible difference,
you had to give women
access to childcare.
The Women's Movement
affected the way
that we could imagine what half
of our population could do.
But also there was a narrative
that framed this re-imagining
of gender roles
as an attack on the family.
Narrator:
In 1971,
Phyllis Schlafly was a political
activist in Alton, Illinois.
She, along with a growing
number of conservatives,
fiercely opposed
the childcare bill,
and framed it as
an attack on families.
The Mondale-Brademas bill
was a very radical piece
of legislation.
It was really for the government
to takeover the raising
of children.
That was not what we wanted
and not the kind of country
that we wanted to live in.
Narrator:
Schlafly and her allies
staunchly defended
their idea of the family,
where mothers would stay home
to care for their children...
and asserted that with hard work
and determination alone,
all families could prosper
without government programs.
Self:
And so when they look at
Civil Rights and all of these
kinds of social programs
that are attempting to support
the American family,
in their minds, they see that
as benefitting immoral families.
Families that have bad values.
Families that don't
work hard enough.
Narrator:
Schlafly's ascent
in conservative circles
had been propelled
by "A Choice, Not an Echo,"
a self-published book that
she sold out of her garage -
three million copies.
The book was written
in support of Arizona Senator
Barry Goldwater's
1964 Presidential campaign.
Announcer:
South Carolina 16 votes
would put Barry Goldwater
over the top.
Narrator:
Although Goldwater suffered
a landslide loss
to Lyndon Johnson,
his campaign galvanized hardcore
conservatives like Schlafly,
who had the knowledge,
resources and patience
to build their
political following.
Schlafly:
I had been very active
in the Federation
of Republican Women,
so I had contacts
all over the country
of Republican women
who knew the political process
and who knew how to
contact their congressmen
and tell them what
we wanted them to do.
Narrator:
But Schlafly's movement
was still underground,
and the Comprehensive
Child Development Act
was moving through Congress
with strong bipartisan support.
In addition to childcare
and pre-school,
new program would include
after-school care
for older children,
meals, medical treatment,
dental check-ups and counseling
that would be available
to the poor for free
and to everyone else
on a sliding scale.
Johnson:
It was locally controlled,
it was totally voluntary,
limited to children
whose parents requested it.
Narrator:
The Comprehensive
Child Development Act
was budgeted at $2 billion
for the first year,
the equivalent
of $11.5 billion today.
The League of Women Voters,
American Home
Economics Association,
Parent Teacher Association,
the National Conference
of Catholic Charities,
all endorsed the bill,
as did the United
Methodist Church,
the Baptist Joint Committee
on Public Affairs,
American Academy
of Pediatrics
and a legion of others.
Mondale:
There was
an overwhelming consensus
that this was a sensible,
reasonable bill.
We were close
to getting something
would give young Americans
in that situation a
better chance.
Narrator:
In the fall of 1971,
the child development bill
passed both houses
of Congress.
Mondale:
, in my opinion,
the most single important
new public policy needed
in America today.
Narrator:
But to become law,
it would need
President Nixon's signature,
and opposition forces
had reached the White House.
A young conservative
White House aide
named Patrick Buchanan
was putting a different spin
on the child development bill.
Buchanan:
I did call it
the most radical piece
of legislation
to come out of this Congress
of the United States.
And we saw that over
in the Soviet Union.
Taking kids
from their parents
and putting them
into these institutions
and having them educated there
rather than at home,
didn't seem to me to be
traditionally American.
I was very close
to the President,
and he'd look to me
to tell him
what the thinking
and feeling was
of the Conservative Movement.
All these groups were
basically the elite,
if you will, the political elite
of the right.
Narrator:
One group of powerful,
elite conservatives known
as the Manhattan 12
was so incensed by Nixon's
tilt towards the center
they planned to introduce
a right-wing republican
challenger to Nixon
in the 72 primary.
Buchanan:
Nixon had imposed
wage and price controls,
he had announced
he was going to China.
So he had a real problem
with the Conservative Movement.
Narrator:
The childcare bill
became a lightning rod
for conservative attacks.
With Buchanan's support,
the Manhattan 12 launched
a campaign
of editorials
attacking the bill,
and demanding
a presidential veto.
Buchanan:
If I saw editorials
on this issue,
I could write a memo
to the President
of the United States saying:
"This is developing,
this is building,
we're up for re-election,
and we've got a problem here."
Narrator:
Buchanan made sure
that Nixon could see there
was a real political threat-
and a political opportunity.
The solution?
Nixon would veto the bill,
and Buchanan would write
the message himself,
in language so strong
it would not only extinguish
the idea once and for all-
it would electrify
his right wing base.
I said I want to write a veto
at the same time
which is political
and ideological
and which hits the Child
Development Act at its core.
And that's exactly what he did,
and he hit a grand slam.
Narrator:
On December 9,1971,
Nixon released
his veto message.
The President
says the $2 billion
to have been spent on
the first year for childcare
would be, as he put it,
a long leap into the dark.
One of his other objections...
Buchanan:
This is the heart of it...
"...for the federal government
to plunge headlong financially
"into supporting
child development
"would commit
the vast moral authority
of the national government..."
"...to the side of communal
approaches to child rearing
over and against the
family-centered approach."
Do you agree with that?
Yes. Yeah.
Yeah. Oh, it's great.
Brademas:
With one stroke of the
President Nixon has broken
his own promise
to support child development,
and he has greatly damaged
the chances
for the children
of working families
as well as poor children
to have an opportunity
for the kind of healthful
and stimulating development
which the President,
at one point in time
pledged his administration
to support.
Edelman:
The veto really did hurt.
It said it was
undermining the family
when the family and
parent role was central
to everything
we'd talked about.
It said it was going to
communalize family life.
Nixon's veto message
is really the first time
that an American President,
the leader of one
of the national parties
reaches out
and takes that rhetoric
and nationalizes it,
this rhetoric about the threat
to the American family.
And suddenly the right wing
had a new and powerful
organizing tool.
Narrator:
Mondale and Brademas
tried to revive their
childcare legislation,
but conservative forces
were growing even stronger.
Mondale:
We decided
back at it again.
We changed some
of the wording
that the right wing had used.
We took the word
"comprehensive" out of there.
We emphasized the control
that rested in the parents,
the voluntary nature
of the program.
But the opposition was building.
Narrator:
An anonymous flyer
was rippling
through the country,
with misleading
and false accusations
against the new bill.
Johnson:
It alleged
that parents cannot
require their children
to go to church or Sunday school
or the synagogue.
It said further that if
a government official found
that in his or her judgment
the parents
were not doing an adequate job
rearing their children,
they could come in
and take the authority away
from the parents.
Narrator:
The flyer ignited
a firestorm of editorials.
Letters poured into Washington.
Johnson:
I got dozens of calls
from my colleagues,
staff members,
Republican and Democratic,
saying,
"How do we respond to this?"
Mondale:
Some of the attacks
were so unhinged
from reality and honesty.
Johnson:
The veto message
and the unsigned flyer
touched emotions and fears.
It turned out to be a very
effective organizing tool
for the right wing.
Fear in politics almost
always triumphs hope.
Buchanan:
That was one of the last
great attempts of
the Great Society Democrats
to basically recreate America.
We stopped that piece cold.
And I'm glad we did.
Mondale:
They did find a golden
of anxiety in America
that worked,
and they knew it worked.
And I think they've kept it up.
Narrator:
Similar legislation
didn't breathe in Washington
for over four decades.
What Nixon's veto
of the childcare development
act really symbolized,
is that the American
social contract
would really not extend
in a broad way,
to help American families.
Narrator:
During the 40 years
since the veto, politicians,
many calling themselves
"pro-family,"
have continued to
chip away at programs
that actually helped
children and families,
and helped our society
build its middle class.
They've targeted them
as unaffordable,
not the government's job,
and an intrusion on families.
When we bailout banks,
or when we allow resources
to be garnered by
the top 1 % of the population
and we forget that
we have an investment
in the entire population
we really set a different kind
of value system.
The President says he vetoed it
mostly because of
its provisions for chitdcare.
Services ranging
from prenatal care
to counseling for teenagers
would have been established.
Mr. Nixon says,
and I quote from
his veto statement,
"No immediate need
has been demonstrated"
for these centers.
Dan Rather, CBS News,
Washington.
Did you know about that?
-1 didn't know about it.
-1 didn't.
Can you imagine
if there was a federal program
with sliding fee childcare-
would that be fantastic
or would that be fantastic?
Hi, Caleb!
Are you looking for Mama Lisa?
Narrator:
There is a federal
childcare program for one of
our nation's largest employers.
Man:
If our families
are taken care of,
there's a sense
of security out there
that we don't have
to worry about them
and we can concentrate
on the mission.
Narrator:
The military's childcare
was once as abysmal as
the rest of the country's.
But in 1989,
18 years after Nixon's veto,
Congress mandated that
they provide high quality care
to any of their families
who wanted it.
Langley:
That's our future.
That's tomorrow's scientists.
That's tomorrow's educators.
What we do
is absolutely critical.
(engine roar)
Narrator:
Today, the US Armed Forces
offers some of the best
child-centered care
in the nation.
It's affordable,
and strictly regulated.
We were once achingly close
to extending this kind of care
to allot America's children.
We know how to doit.
We've enacted
effective family policies
in past times of need.
Will we do it again?
We've got to figure out
how to sound the sirens,